This is the last part of my Guest Lectures
on Electron Spin, in which I'll focus on
normally non-magnetic systems which are
pushed out of spin degenerate equilibrium
by spin injection from an external
thermomagnetic source.
I'm going to first tell you why we
want to study these systems, and
why this is such a hard problem, or
at least why the most straightforward
approach to solving it is bound to fail.
Then I'll show you one particular
way that I have personally used
to obtain spin injection in silicon and
germanium semi-conductor devices.
And a little bit about what
can be learned as a result.
To motivate the kinds of information about
non-equilibrium spin transport we're
after, I want to appeal to the history
of non-equilibrium charge transport.
Namely, minority carriers and
semiconductors.
The seminal measurements
were done by Haynes and
Shockley in the mid 20th
century at Bell Labs.
In these time-domain experiments,
a narrow pulse of minority electrons
were injected into p-type semiconductors
filled with equilibrium holes.
An electric field carried these
electrons to a charge detector,
where the pulse could be analyzed.
By measuring the time of flight they could
determine the minority carrier mobility or
the proportionality constant
between applied electric field and
electron velocity.
By measuring the spreading
of the pulse in time,
they determine the strength of random
thermal fluctuations from scattering,
the minority carrier
diffusion coefficient.
And by integrating over the pulse and
determining how many electron made it
without annihilating with a positively
charged hole, the minority carrier
lifetime could be determined.
Without these values, none of the solid
state devices be use today can be designed
and successfully made.
So, if we speculate any use for a spin
polarized electrons out of equilibrium
in semi-conductor devices, then we
at least need to be able to measure
the spin analogs of these parameters.
So, let's first look at why it's not so
easy to transfer
the substantial spin imbalance,
spin polarization from a feral magnet
into a non-magnetic electronic material.
Especially when using a semiconductor
in an effort to make, for example,
new kinds of spin transistors.
The most straightforward way one might
naively try is to make an ohmic or
linearly resistive contact between
the feral magnet and the semiconductor.
Let's see how this works for
plain old charge injection.
Ohm's law says that the charge current
density flowing is proportional to
the conductivity and driven by spacial
gradient of an electrochemical potential.
This combines the effects of electric
field gradient of electrostatic potential
with flow from high concentration
to low via random thermal
fluctuations comprising
the random walks of diffusion.
If we incorporate the device geometry,
we can use this expression to recover
the more familiar V=IR form of Ohm's Law.
In metal-semiconductor ohmic contacts,
current is conserved
across the interface but the conductivity
in metal is large so the potential energy
provided by voltage qV drops mostly across
the lower conductivity semiconductor.
Now, if you want spin injection to
accompany this charge injection
then the currents for spin up and
down must be different.
Since the connectivities for up and
down are the same in the semiconductor,
their respective electrochemical
gradients must be different.
This is what we need to happen
on the semiconductor side.
Spin up and down electrochemical
potentials have different gradients to
drive asymmetrical current densities
comprising of spin current.
The one avoidable consequence of this
asymmetry is electrochemical splitting at
the ohmic inter-phase.
Using Ohm's Law we can obtain a
relationship between current polarization
and this electrochemical
potential splitting.
The first term in parenthesis is due
to the average potential drop over
the transport length scale L.
Note that although J up and
J down are not equal,
their sum does equal the total
charge current as expected.
Now, we have to derive equivalent
expressions on the ferromagnetic
side where we will see the deleterious
effect of the splitting on spin inject.
On the ferromagnetic side,
the electrochemical potential splitting
relaxes to zero in equilibrium due to
spin flips away from the interface.
The spin relaxation length scale is the
so-called spin diffusion length lambda.
By once again applying Ohm's Law we
get the following expressions for
the current densities of spin up and
down on the ferromagnetic side.
Note that there are two important
differences between these expressions for
the ferromagnet and the ones above
describing transport in a semiconductor.
First, the spin dependent connectivities
are not equal in the ferromagnet
due to their dependence on
the asymmetric carrier densities.
Second, and as a result the deviation of
the interface lecture chemical potential
from equilibrium are not symmetric.
In other words, C up is not
equal to C down in this figure.
However, because the ideal
interface preserve spin,
the electrochemical
potentials are continuous.
So, we do have the sum rule giving us
a total splitting, which we need to
determine the spin polarization flowing
across the interface in the semiconductor.
Using the definitions of both
the injected current polarization and
the bulk ferromagnetic polarization,
we can derive a simple expression for
the splitting on the ferromagnetic side.
In intimate omega contact, the
electrochemical potentials are continuous.
So this is the same as a splitting
on the semiconductor side.
We can therefore substitute it into
our previously derived expression
to obtain this result.
Note that this is very different
from our naive expectation,
since it depends strongly on the magnitude
of a dimensionalist parameter Epsilon,
the ratio of connectivities and
transport lengths across the interface.
If Epsilon is much less than 1 then
only when the bulk magnetic polarization
beta is approximately 1,
a half metallic ferromagnet,
do we recover the desired case where
the injected current polarization P
is approximately equal to the bulk
ferromagnetic polarization beta.
Unfortunately, the bulk polarization of
a typical ferromagnets is around 50%.
So as this plot shows,
I'll make an injection is doomed in
the last epsilon is at least .01.
However, the relevant materials properties
are not forgiving in this respect.
The ratio of conductivities between
a semi-conductor and a ferromagnetic
metal is significantly below unity,
even from highly dope semi-conductors and
how we disordered amorphous
ferromagnetic metals.
Like wise the ratio of
length scales is small
due to the fast spin relaxation
in the ferromagnetic
leading to the spin defusion length
lambda of approximately tem nanometers.
Where as in semiconductors with low
spin orbit interaction such as silicon.
Transport lengths can be ten microns or
longer, even at elevated
ambient temperatures.
Therefore, even in the best scenario,
epsilon is approximately 10
to the minus 4, leading to the negligible
polarization showing the figure.
Over the range of expected values for
epsilon, one needs bulk polarization of at
least 95% for injected polarization
of greater than 10% or so.
So elemental ferro magnets iron,
cobalt, and
nickel are useless for
spin injection in the Ohmic region.
In fact,
the problem is evident even graphically.
The splitting delta mu
which is necessary for
a non-zero injected current polarization
also tends to reverse the spin of
electro-chemical potential gradient at
the interface on the ferromagnetic side.
Inhibiting injection,
the very spin species we want to
inject into the semiconductor.
Therefore in order to maintain the
constraint of current conservation across
the interface the study state
inter-facial splitting is small and
the injected current polarization,
P is negligible.
Modern techniques to over come this
problem include quantum mechanical
tunneling, and in my lab
ballistic hot electron injection,
which circumvents the issues relevant for
ohmic injections here.
I'm not going to describe
the details of spin injection and
detection, that's a whole other course.
In device physics and magnetism, but
rather what we can learn from measurements
of spin transport and
manipulation by any mean.
The key to extracting the most information
from these measurements is exploiting
a topic I mentioned several
seconds ago spin precession.
Again this is the magnetic analog
of a spinning top or gyroscope,
with off axis gravitational force,
causing a mechanical torque.
In spin transit devices,
we apply a magnetic field perpendicular
to the injected spin direction but
parallel to the transport direction and
caused by electric fields.
And the spin will precess, in a plane.
The final spin precession angle is
determined by the product of spin
procession frequency,
determined by magnetic field strength,
about 28 gigahertz per Tesla.
And a material with weak spin
orbit coupling like silicon, and
the transit time inversely proportional
to electric field strength.
If we apply a perpendicular magnetic
field with the appropriate strength,
then you can cause the spins to
precess an average of 180 degrees,
fully flipping with respect to
their ejected polarization.
Your experimental measurement of sigma,
the spin along the initialization
excess will then vary.
Doubling the magnetic field,
doubles the procession frequency and
therefore results in an average
procession angle of 360 degrees.
A coherent full rotation restoring
the expectation value of sigma Z,
as you can see from this
actual experimental data,
it doesn't matter whether the field
polarity is positive or negative.
In other words it doesn't matter
if the spin processes clockwise or
counterclockwise.
Now if all the electrons have a same
transit time injector to detector.
We would expect this cosine like
oscillation to continue indefinitely for
higher and higher orders of precession
rotations, but that's not what happens.
In reality,
not all electrons have the same transit
time due to random scattering processes.
Therefore an uncertainty in transit time
gives rise to an uncertainty
in precession of angle.
When the procession frequency grows
in higher and higher magnetic field,
the effects of partial cancellation can
be seen and the oscillations diminish.
We can model this measurement
with a transport simulation,
summing up the cosine-like contributions
from electrons where the distribution of
arrival times in order to fit
the non-equilibrium spin mobility and
diffusion coefficient we're after.
However, there's a model independent
method with far greater utility.
The key is to recognize that
this integral summation
is really just a Fourier transform.
Therefore, the oscillations we measure
can be inverted to yield the empirical
transport distribution without
any model dependence whatsoever.
In this example we can see the effects
of increasing the electric field.
Oscillation period increases, and the
number of oscillations themselves grows.
But the transforms clearly show that this
is a result of smaller mean transit time
and standard deviation.
This method of obtaining time of
flight is called the Larmor clock.
We don't make an explicit
measurement of transit time.
We measure the angle of rotation
at a known angular velocity.
The same way we measure
time from an analog clock.
We know the rotation speed of the hand for
the clock, 360 degrees per hour for
the minute hand, and infer time
from the instantaneous orientation.
We're likewise measuring
the spin orientation and
determining how long it processed
in a known magnetic field.
For measurements of spin transport,
we can correlate the transit time
with final spin polarization and
extract the spin lifetime.
In silicon, we can see that although the
non-equilibrium lifetimes of hundreds of
nanoseconds are fairly long In comparison
to the momentum relaxation time of
pico seconds or
less is strongly dependent on temperature,
increasing dramatically
as the sample is cooled.
This demonstrates the importance
of relaxation via a nominally
spin-independent process, electron
scattering off of thermal phonons,
distortions in the crystal lattice.
This electron phonons spin relaxation
process results from the fact that,
do to the weak but
non zero spin orbit coupling,
the electron wave functions are not
pure spin eigenstates up and down.
Rather spin up has a small amount
of spin down and vice versa, but
remain fully orthogonal.
We can calculate the transition rate
between these states constituting a spin
flip due to momentum scattering of
these free electrons from wave vector
k to k prime by using using the so
called Fermi golden rule.
This first order expression is
proportional to the square of the matrix
element of the scattering potential,
coupling the two initial and
final states, and
the density of final states row.
Now, even if the scattering potential only
couples states of different momentacae
due to the spin order mixing
of the wave function,
we see that there's
a non-zero matrix element.
And this is exactly equal to
the quantity determining the spin
preserving momentum relaxation rate.
The spin-relaxation is therefore
proportional to the momentum relaxation
and also proportional to the square but
typically small spin mixing amplitude.
This being the end of my contribution to
this course I'm obliged to acknowledge
support, not only for my experimental
research on spin transport, but
also support for scientific
outreach efforts to students and
the public outside my institution,
the University of Maryland.
In particular,
the National Science Foundation Career
Award has made this work possible.
It's been my great pleasure to share this
quick story of electron spin with you.
And I invite you to learn about more
about Spin through your own study and
perhaps even original research in physics
and engineering labs around the world.